+++
title = "What is a Phoneme, Really?"
date = 2019-01-18T00:00:00
draft = true
authors = ["David Braze"]
tags = ["phone", "phoneme", "phoneme awareness", "speech", "phonics", "alphabetic principle"]
categories = ["Language & Reading"]

+++

In the teaching of reading, the word "phoneme" gets tossed around
frequently. It is an important concept in relation to "phonics" based
approaches to early reading instruction. Reading teachers are
typically taught that a phoneme is a "speech sound",[^1] but that
isn't quite right. In fact a phoneme is best defined as a **set** of
speech sounds. So, a phoneme is an abstraction, a mental category. It
is **not** an individual sound, but rather a collection of speech
sounds that behave similarly; individual speech sounds are called
phones. These phones belong to a specific set, or category, of sounds
(that **set** is the phoneme). So, how does this work?

Let's start by considering the ell sound as it occurs in the words
"like" /la&#x026A;k/ and "milk" /m&#x026A;lk/.[^2] Speakers of English
perceive the ell sounds in these words as being the same, but in fact
they are systematically different. We are conditioned to treat them as
being the same sound because they belong to the same phoneme, but with
a little effort we can tease out their differences. So, let's play
with speech sounds.

First, speak the word "like" several times in a row, putting special
emphasis on its ell sound each time. If you pay attention to the
placement of your tongue tip while producing the ell sound, you will
notice that it is in firm contact with the ridge of gum behind your
top front teeth (it's called the alveolar ridge). You can get that
same ell phone by saying "lalalalala" rapidly. You will notice the
repeated contact of your tongue tip with the alveolar ridge. This the
characteristic tongue movement we use to produce that specific ell
phone. We're going to call this particular ell phone the *light*
ell. This is the ell sound that occurs before vowels.

Now let's look at the word "milk". Again, speak the word several times
in a row with emphasis on its ell sound. If you pay attention to your
tongue position during the ell sound, you will notice that your tongue
tip is not so firmly drawn to the alveolar ridge, if it touches it at
all. In fact, the main tongue movement for the ell in milk is for the
**back** of the tongue to raise up until it comes in contact with the
soft palate (the rear part of the roof of your mouth). We will call
this alternative ell sound the *dark* ell. You can pull off the same
trick as with "lalala" for the *light* ell, by repeating the word "call"
several times in a row with no breaks in between. The *dark* ell is
the ell sound that typically occurs after vowels. (It's not quite that
simple, but close enough for present purposes.)

The *light* ell of "like" and the *dark* ell of "milk" are noticeably
different speech sounds and they are produced with different, albeit
similar, tongue gestures. You can, if you choose, easily pronounce the
word "milk", or "call", while keeping the tip of your tongue tucked
firmly behind your bottom front teeth. But if you try the same thing
with the word "like", its ell sound will be noticeably defective. (Go
ahead. Give it a try.) The light ell and the dark ell are different
phones (different speech sounds) but English speakers treat them as
belonging to the same category of speech sounds, the same
phoneme. They both count as ells.

In fact, when the need arises, linguists will use a more detailed
transcription to represent the phones that occur in a word, instead of
the phonemes. This is called phonetic transcription and these are
placed between square brackets, instead of slashes, to set them apart
from phonemic transcriptions. Each phonetic variant of a phoneme will
be represented by a different symbol. So, while the phonemic
transcription of "milk" is as given above ("/m&#x026A;lk/"), the
phonetic transcription looks like this: [m&#x026A;&#x26B;k].

So what about the short-hand of calling a phoneme a speech sound? Does
it matter if we gloss over what some might consider a niggling detail
of little relevance? Certainly, in speech, a phoneme has to make its
presence known somehow, so, it will be represented by a contextually
appropriate *phone*. In hearing speech, it's usually easy to assign
each phone that you hear to the right phoneme. Exceptions can arise
for a number of reasons, some more interesting than others. A few of
the more common include: noise in the environment, inattention on the
part of the listener, speaker's accent unfamiliar to listener, and so
on.

That said, there are at least a couple of reasons that phone--phoneme
mappings may be of particular relevance in the classroom. First, the
alphabetic principle at the core of the English writing system is a
mapping between phonemes and letters. That's why our spelling system
maps light ell and dark ell to the same letter. Beginning readers may
go through a phase where they try to map letters to phones instead of
phonemes, and that can make for some creative spellings. A reading
teacher needs to be able to recognize that that's what is happening
and help the student through it. Another issue is that, in different
dialects of English, each phoneme may consist of different sets of
phones. For example, speakers of some varieties of English may replace
the dark ell with a vowel sound. An example would be a pronunciation
of "milk" as [m&#x026A;&#x28A;k]. The teacher needs to be able to
recognize that this vowel phone is still a part of the ell phoneme.

In this post, I've tried to shed light on the nature of phonemes and
their relationship to speech sounds, and why it can matter in teaching
reading. Certainly, more can be said, about phonemes and about
the connection of speech to reading. I'll follow up on both these
matters in later blog posts.

[^1]: For example, Louisa Moats writes, "From a finite set of speech
      sounds (**phonemes**), speakers of an oral language say and
      understand many thousands of words" (p3).
	
      <p>Moats, L. C. (2000). Speech to Print: language essentials for
      teachers. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

[^2]: I'll follow the linguistic convention of putting phonemic
      transcriptions between forward slashes.
